README.md, before:

# Strive Weather

## Overview

Web application that displays the weather for the three Strive offices, making 
use of the OpenWeatherMap API (API key + office locations provided in test).

## Things I have ignored due to time constraints

- Best practices re dev/deployment and reproducible environments (it works on
  my machine).
- CI & deployment of the application. I had aimed to set up GH actions, but
  didn't have the time.
- I18n. I would normally want this set up first, even if it were just English.
- Related to previous: time zone handling, in particular the fact that I'm not
  taking into account *where* a user is viewing the site. This doesn't matter 
  for the current weather, but it does for forecasts. No time for time.
- A11y. I would want dev-side testing in place and running on my machine at 
  minimum.


## Setup Notes

These are required (older versions might work, can't at all guarantee it):

| Tool   | Version | Note                                      |
| ------ | ------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| Ruby   | 3.2.2   |                                           |
| SQLite | 3.44.2  |                                           |
| Rails  | 7.1.2   | Just for the CLI, may not be needed, ymmv |

For the task, a key has been provided for the [Open Weather Map](openweathermap.org/)
API. Note that this is for the free tier, which provides access to:

1. [the current weather at a location](https://openweathermap.org/current), and
2. [a 5-day forecast](https://openweathermap.org/forecast5) (which provides the forecast in 3-hour intervals).

The key has been encoded as a credential, it is not an environment variable.

---

To set up and run the application, assuming the specified Ruby version is 
installed, `cd` into this project directory, and run:

```
gem install
```

Followed by:

```
rails server
```

This should start a rails server at http://127.0.0.1:3000

## Initial steps

- [x] Initialise basic minimal Rails install.
- [x] Add Open Weather Map API key to the Rails user config secrets.
- [x] Add simple functional sketch of service object that hits Open Weather Map API.
- [x] Dump the data into the app:
    - [x] Add a route (`weathertest`)
    - [x] Add a controller that calls the OWM API & grabs data.
    - [x] Add a view that displays that data on an HTML page.

### Notes: Rails setup

Note that this is a minimal install (`rails new strive_weather --minimal`) which
strips out a large chunk of gems that have no relevance here (mailer, websockets, &c).


### Notes: Credentials

The OpenWeatherMap API key is stored in the standard Rails credentials file.

---

_I don't think this is something that existed last time I touched Rails, so the
following is a note for myself._

To *edit* the credentials file (where `EDITOR` is editor of choice):

```
EDITOR=vim rails credentials:edit
```

This will decrypt the file, and the api key data is defined like so:
 
```yml
open_weather_map:
  api_key: 'supersecretkey'
```

To *use* the value:

```
Rails.application.credentials.open_weather_map[:api_key]
```

---

> **NOTE** It would probably be sensible to check for the key on server
> initialisation, and explode immediately if it isn't found. It would probably
> also be sensible to provide a, say, `Settings` or `AppSettings` or whatever
> service that provides the value to the rest of the application, rather than
> referencing directly in the business logic.
>
> But given there's only one secret value I need here, just going to grab 
> it directly in-app.


### Notes: service object sketch

From reading up on HTTP clients, the _de facto_ standard seems to be
[Faraday](https://lostisland.github.io/faraday/), which fixes some problems
with the stdlib's `Net::HTTP`, and doesn't have some of the issues
[HTTParty](https://github.com/jnunemaker/httparty) (the previous _de facto_
standard client) has.

So the `OpenWeatherMapService` class leverages Faraday.

It includes explicit methods for hitting both the endpoint specified
in the test and the `forecast` API, I'll get back to why later on.

It does not error: both methods return an object specifying the response code
and either `:data` or an `:err` field that holds an error message. There is
also a `:url` field for debugging purposes.

---

To test in console (`rails console`), example commands:

```
require './app/services/open_weather_map_service.rb'
owm = OpenWeatherMapService.new()
lat = 54.971250
lon = -1.614590
owm.current_weather_for(lat, lon)
```

---

For app purposes, ther is a route (`weather_api`), a controller
(`weather_api_controller`) with an `index` method, and an associated view. This
prints out the current weather for the three offices.


### Finally

This fulfils the basics of the task. There are no tests or visual styling, and 
what is printed is a raw JSON response. But is does show the current weather
at all three locations.


## Offices


The application shows weather for offices. So the offices are the thing that is
to be displayed - the weather [forecast] is just a data associated with an office.

The root of the application is the index of offices. Then each office can be
viewed individually.

- [x] Routes:
    - [x] `offices`: an index page of offices.
    - [x] `offices/:id`: a specific office.
- [x] Root path ("/") to match "offices", then for specific offices "/:id"
- [x] Controller for offices, with `index` and `show` methods.
- [x] Views for `index` and `show` methods.
- [ ] Error views.
- [x] Data structure for offices.
- [x] Dummy a populated offices database table using a YAML file representing
      the office data structure.
- [x] Add an initializer that provides an `OFFICES` global variable, referencing
      the data in the YAML file, ensuring it atomises the keys to match how
      the actual data will be made available once model written & Db populated.
- [ ] Ensure views link together on FE:
    - [x] link for each office in index > show page for that office.
    - [x] link on show > go back to index.
    - [ ] Correct links on error pages that link back to the index page.
- [ ] Add basic controller tests to explain the structuring.
- [ ] Dummy current weather summary on office views.
- [ ] Dummy weather forecast last updated time in views.
- [x] Initial sketch of CSS for site at this point (content is now extant).
- [x] Component for tabbed interface on show page showing forecast.
- [ ] Component for live office time as user view page.
- [ ] Time Zone information for each office in views
- [ ] Model for offices.
- [ ] Migration for offices.
    - [ ] Seeds for offices (identical to the dummy data).
- [ ] Replace calls to the dummied YAML-based data with calls to the actual data 
      from the model.
- [ ] Delete the YAML data file + its initialiser.

### Notes: routing

The only routes that are important here are:

1. `GET "/offices`", which is a index page resource that displays information 
   on all offices, using `offices#index`, and 
2. `GET "/offices/:id"`, which shows more detailed data for a single office,
   using `offices#show`.

This is, however, a very small app, so I've set the `root` (i.e. `"/"`) to be
the index page, and then `"/:id"` (rather than `"offices/:id"` shows the detailed
data.

This is extremely contrictive and not scalable, but it's relatively easy to 
change the logic in the router were the scope to widen in a real application.


### Notes: data

The data for each office is going to be stored in the database. I don't need to
store much. 

It would be perfectly reasonable to store it as a flat file, but it's a little
more flexible if it's in the database. And I'm using a database Anyway, so I
might as well leverage it. As an initial sketch:

```
Table office {
  id           text [pk]
  municipality text
  country      text
  lat          real
  lon          real
}
```

Can be a city (Vancouver, Newcastle), or a town (St Julian's), hence `municipality`

The `country` & `municipality` columns are populated with (English) human text,
In actual app, they would just be codes, making translation much easier, but that
is outside the scope & time constraints of the task.


### Notes: dummying data for development

Before populating an actual database, useful to be able to get content onto the
page. So to do this, I load in a YAML file with data & provide a global variable
(`OFFICES`) via an initializer. This can then be used in the controllers and then
in the views for quick development before anything concrete goes in.


### Design sketch

![Rough ketch of application's two screens](./strive_weather_v1_sketch.png)

Commit message:

replace dummied office data with model + calls in controller (+ seeds)

README.md, after:

# Strive Weather

## Overview

Web application that displays the weather for the three Strive offices, making 
use of the OpenWeatherMap API (API key + office locations provided in test).

## Things I have ignored due to time constraints

- Best practices re dev/deployment and reproducible environments (it works on
  my machine).
- CI & deployment of the application. I had aimed to set up GH actions, but
  didn't have the time.
- I18n. I would normally want this set up first, even if it were just English.
- Related to previous: time zone handling, in particular the fact that I'm not
  taking into account *where* a user is viewing the site. This doesn't matter 
  for the current weather, but it does for forecasts. No time for time.
- A11y. I would want dev-side testing in place and running on my machine at 
  minimum.


## Setup Notes

These are required (older versions might work, can't at all guarantee it):

| Tool   | Version | Note                                      |
| ------ | ------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| Ruby   | 3.2.2   |                                           |
| SQLite | 3.44.2  |                                           |
| Rails  | 7.1.2   | Just for the CLI, may not be needed, ymmv |

For the task, a key has been provided for the [Open Weather Map](openweathermap.org/)
API. Note that this is for the free tier, which provides access to:

1. [the current weather at a location](https://openweathermap.org/current), and
2. [a 5-day forecast](https://openweathermap.org/forecast5) (which provides the forecast in 3-hour intervals).

The key has been encoded as a credential, it is not an environment variable.

---

To set up and run the application, assuming the specified Ruby version is 
installed, `cd` into this project directory, and run:

```
gem install
```

Once installed, seed the database:

```
rails db:seed
```

Then start:

```
rails server
```

This should start a rails server at http://127.0.0.1:3000

## Initial steps

- [x] Initialise basic minimal Rails install.
- [x] Add Open Weather Map API key to the Rails user config secrets.
- [x] Add simple functional sketch of service object that hits Open Weather Map API.
- [x] Dump the data into the app:
    - [x] Add a route (`weathertest`)
    - [x] Add a controller that calls the OWM API & grabs data.
    - [x] Add a view that displays that data on an HTML page.

### Notes: Rails setup

Note that this is a minimal install (`rails new strive_weather --minimal`) which
strips out a large chunk of gems that have no relevance here (mailer, websockets, &c).


### Notes: Credentials

The OpenWeatherMap API key is stored in the standard Rails credentials file.

---

_I don't think this is something that existed last time I touched Rails, so the
following is a note for myself._

To *edit* the credentials file (where `EDITOR` is editor of choice):

```
EDITOR=vim rails credentials:edit
```

This will decrypt the file, and the api key data is defined like so:
 
```yml
open_weather_map:
  api_key: 'supersecretkey'
```

To *use* the value:

```
Rails.application.credentials.open_weather_map[:api_key]
```

---

> **NOTE** It would probably be sensible to check for the key on server
> initialisation, and explode immediately if it isn't found. It would probably
> also be sensible to provide a, say, `Settings` or `AppSettings` or whatever
> service that provides the value to the rest of the application, rather than
> referencing directly in the business logic.
>
> But given there's only one secret value I need here, just going to grab 
> it directly in-app.


### Notes: service object sketch

From reading up on HTTP clients, the _de facto_ standard seems to be
[Faraday](https://lostisland.github.io/faraday/), which fixes some problems
with the stdlib's `Net::HTTP`, and doesn't have some of the issues
[HTTParty](https://github.com/jnunemaker/httparty) (the previous _de facto_
standard client) has.

So the `OpenWeatherMapService` class leverages Faraday.

It includes explicit methods for hitting both the endpoint specified
in the test and the `forecast` API, I'll get back to why later on.

It does not error: both methods return an object specifying the response code
and either `:data` or an `:err` field that holds an error message. There is
also a `:url` field for debugging purposes.

---

To test in console (`rails console`), example commands:

```
require './app/services/open_weather_map_service.rb'
owm = OpenWeatherMapService.new()
lat = 54.971250
lon = -1.614590
owm.current_weather_for(lat, lon)
```

---

For app purposes, ther is a route (`weather_api`), a controller
(`weather_api_controller`) with an `index` method, and an associated view. This
prints out the current weather for the three offices.


### Finally

This fulfils the basics of the task. There are no tests or visual styling, and 
what is printed is a raw JSON response. But is does show the current weather
at all three locations.


## Offices


The application shows weather for offices. So the offices are the thing that is
to be displayed - the weather [forecast] is just a data associated with an office.

The root of the application is the index of offices. Then each office can be
viewed individually.

- [x] Routes:
    - [x] `offices`: an index page of offices.
    - [x] `offices/:id`: a specific office.
- [x] Root path ("/") to match "offices", then for specific offices "/:id"
- [x] Controller for offices, with `index` and `show` methods.
- [x] Views for `index` and `show` methods.
- [ ] Error views.
- [x] Data structure for offices.
- [x] Dummy a populated offices database table using a YAML file representing
      the office data structure.
- [x] Add an initializer that provides an `OFFICES` global variable, referencing
      the data in the YAML file, ensuring it atomises the keys to match how
      the actual data will be made available once model written & Db populated.
- [ ] Ensure views link together on FE:
    - [x] link for each office in index > show page for that office.
    - [x] link on show > go back to index.
    - [ ] Correct links on error pages that link back to the index page.
- [ ] Add basic controller tests to explain the structuring.
- [ ] Dummy current weather summary on office views.
- [ ] Dummy weather forecast last updated time in views.
- [x] Initial sketch of CSS for site at this point (content is now extant).
- [x] Component for tabbed interface on show page showing forecast.
- [ ] Component for live office time as user view page.
- [ ] Time Zone information for each office in views
- [ ] Model for offices.
- [x] Migration for offices.
    - [x] Seeds for offices (identical to the dummy data).
- [ ] Replace calls to the dummied YAML-based data with calls to the actual data 
      from the model.
- [ ] Delete the YAML data file + its initialiser.

### Notes: routing

The only routes that are important here are:

1. `GET "/offices`", which is a index page resource that displays information 
   on all offices, using `offices#index`, and 
2. `GET "/offices/:id"`, which shows more detailed data for a single office,
   using `offices#show`.

This is, however, a very small app, so I've set the `root` (i.e. `"/"`) to be
the index page, and then `"/:id"` (rather than `"offices/:id"` shows the detailed
data.

This is extremely contrictive and not scalable, but it's relatively easy to 
change the logic in the router were the scope to widen in a real application.


### Notes: data

The data for each office is going to be stored in the database. I don't need to
store much. 

It would be perfectly reasonable to store it as a flat file, but it's a little
more flexible if it's in the database. And I'm using a database Anyway, so I
might as well leverage it. As an initial sketch:

```
Table office {
  id           text [pk]
  municipality text
  country      text
  lat          real
  lon          real
}
```

Can be a city (Vancouver, Newcastle), or a town (St Julian's), hence `municipality`

The `country` & `municipality` columns are populated with (English) human text,
In actual app, they would just be codes, making translation much easier, but that
is outside the scope & time constraints of the task.


### Notes: dummying data for development

Before populating an actual database, useful to be able to get content onto the
page. So to do this, I load in a YAML file with data & provide a global variable
(`OFFICES`) via an initializer. This can then be used in the controllers and then
in the views for quick development before anything concrete goes in.


### Design sketch

![Rough ketch of application's two screens](./strive_weather_v1_sketch.png)

### Notes: model conventions vs. initial idea of data modelled in SQL

Rails expects an `id` field. Things like the fancy view helpers helpers don't
work ootb without that ID.

The ID is just the autoincrementing `rowid`, it's meaningless. Using a specified*, 
meaningful ID is slightly fiddly to set up. It should be that, but time constraints
mean I'll just rely on the default for now, but that changes how I think about 
the data.

Initially, I'd wanted to use a readable string to identify the offices. Still think
this needs to be done. To reference weather data, I initially wanted to use a
compound primary key of `(lat, lon, timestamp)`. Still think this is the best
approach, but Rails will actively get in the way of this.
